---
layout: default
description: LAO/STO. Why this materials pair is taking the condensed matter physics field by storm.
title: LaAlO<sub>3</sub>/SrTiO<sub>3</sub>
subtitle:
categories:
tags:
stars:
alias: /laosto.php
---

<p>The stone age. The iron age. The bronze age. Our names for the eras of human history emphasize how prosperity is driven by our ability to harness new materials. Better materials lead to better technology, and better technology leads to better humanity (or so we hope).</p>
<p>Today, scientists like me continue to hunt for new materials from which to construct new technology. One promising group of materials is the oxides. Oxides are special because they contain oxygen. And what makes oxygen so special? Oxygen is a very special element in part because it’s so reactive (incidentally, this is why oxygen is so important in biology. Oxygen reactions power our cells. Oxygen’s reactivity can also be bad, which is why nutritionists recommend that you eat anti-oxidants, which help prevent free oxygen radical from reacting with your DNA to give you cancer).</p>
<p>Oxides are everywhere in our lives. Glass is silicon oxide. Rust is iron oxide. Water is hydrogen oxide. Sapphires are aluminum oxide. These materials each comprise oxygen and another element, so the recipes are pretty simple. Scientists understand these materials well. However, when you start looking at complex oxides with more complicated chemical formulas, the possible combinations of chemical elements climb exponentially. Scientists hope that hidden in this landscape of potential combinations lay materials that can cheaply outperform today’s materials. This is the general idea of what I do.</p>
<p>But what do I do specifically? I study the interface between TiO2-terminated (100) SrTiO3 and LaAlO3. Let’s go into the history.</p>
<p>In 2004, Ohtomo and Hwang made an interesting discovery. The interface of two electrical insulators, LAO and STO, was metallic! Yada yada yada.</p>
