---
title: On Google
layout: default
tags: notes
---

*   In 2017, Alphabet earned $111B of revenue
    *   Of that $111B from Alphabet, $110B was Google (99%)
    *   Of that $110B from Google, $95B was ads (86%)
    *   Of that $95B from ads, $78B was ads on Google-owned websites (82%)
    *   And of that $78B in Google ads, about ~$50B was on mobile (67%)
*   Your eyeballs are worth ~$100 a year to Google (~$100B in ad revenue across ~1B users). What's more, if you assume those $100 of ads are for products with 20% margins, then that implies Google's ads cause each of us to shift our annual spending by an average of $500+. Wow.
*   Every Google ad you've ever clicked is shown here: [https://myactivity.google.com/myactivity?hl=en&st=ad&product=27](https://myactivity.google.com/myactivity?hl=en&st=ad&product=27)
    *   I click ~1 ad a month (26 clicks over last 24 months), despite feeling that I almost never click on ads. (However, I can't recall how many of those were intentional vs unintentional, or if any led to purchases.)
*   One fact that I don't think I've internalized enough is just how quickly these tech companies - even the giant ones - continue to grow. Like, you'd think that after 20 years, the search market would be pretty mature, right? But no, Google revenue has been growing around 25% a year since 2009. From 2016 to 2017, Google's ad clicks grew 46%! Search is not yet saturated.
*   One distinguishing feature of Google is its strategic choice to invest billions into products that it gives away for free (e.g., Android and Chrome). Google is able to do this because so much money goes through Google search. If Google can make the internet slightly easier to use, so that people use the internet slightly more, that is worth billions to Google. If Google can give away free products that reduce a competitor's ability to steer users away from Google search, that is worth billions to Google. Search is Google's golden goose, and if any product appears unprofitable or irrational on the surface (e.g., Google Fiber), your first hypothesis should be that it somehow complements search.
*   Google has eight products with 1B users:
    *   Android + Google Play Store
    *   Chrome
    *   Drive
    *   Gmail
    *   Maps
    *   Search
    *   YouTube
*   Although Google is considered visionary, most of Google's products have been late to market (see below). In some cases, Google proved that doing things well beats doing things first, even in markets with strong returns to scale. But in other cases (e.g., cloud), being late to market was costly.
    *   Late to search (1998, 3 years after Alta Vista, Yahoo, etc.)
    *   Late to free web-based email (2004, 8 years after Hotmail)
    *   Late to internet maps (2005, 9 years after MapQuest)
    *   Late to internet browsers (2008, 13 years after Internet Explorer and Opera, 6 years after Firefox, 5 years after Safari)
    *   Late to smartphones (2008, 1 year after iPhone, 8 years after Pocket PC 2000)
    *   Late to social networking (2011, 7 years after Facebook, 14 years after Six Degrees) [ignoring Orkut, which was founded/copied in 2004]
    *   Late to cloud infrastructure (2011, 6 years after AWS)
    *   Late to cloud storage (2012, 5 years after Dropbox, OneDrive)
*   Many of Google's best-known hits began outside of Google:
    *   Maps (maps from Where2 Technologies, acquired in 2004; real-time traffic from ZipDash, acquired in 2004; satellite imagery from Keyhole, acquired in 2005)
    *   Android (founded in 2003, bought for $50M+ in 2005)
    *   YouTube (founded in 2005, bought for $1.7B in 2006)
    *   Adsense (Google acquired Applied Semantics in 2003, DoubleClick in 2007, and AdMob for mobile ads in 2009)
    *   Google Docs (spreadsheets by 2Web, acquired in 2005; docs by Upstartle, acquired in 2006; slides by Tonic Systems, acquired in 2007)
    *   Waymo (Thrun, 510 Systems?)
*   Google acquires companies frequently (more than 1 company per week in 2010 and 2011): [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mergers_and_acquisitions_by_Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mergers_and_acquisitions_by_Alphabet)
    *   One theory I've often heard is that today's tech giants have learned from the declines of their predecessors. IBM, Sun, Microsoft, etc. failed to anticipate seemingly small trends like the PC, the internet, and mobile phones, all of which fundamentally changed the market for computer technology. Today's tech giants have taken the lesson to heart and will acquire startups at a premium, where that premium is effectively financed by acting as an insurance policy on the tech giant's core business.
    *   Although this theory sounds reasonable, it's difficult to falsify without sitting in the decision room with Google's executives. Alternate theories include Google believing that (1) tech startups are systematically undervalued, or (2) there are serious synergies from sharing talent, tech, distribution, and brand across a portfolio of products.
*   Alphabet has ~14 subsidiaries
    *   Google ([~$10B profit per quarter](https://www.statista.com/chart/7820/googles-other-bets-lose-money/))
    *   Other bets ([~$1B losses per quarter](https://www.statista.com/chart/7820/googles-other-bets-lose-money/))
        *   Access (fiber)
        *   CapitalG (growth equity fund)
        *   Calico (aging & age-related diseases)
        *   Chronicle (computer security)
        *   DeepMind (machine learning)
        *   GV (VC fund)
        *   Jigsaw (incubator/think tank?)
        *   Loon (internet balloons)
        *   Sidewalk Labs (urban tech - [pilot plan for 12-acre waterfront in Toronto](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/sidewalk-labs-master-plan-1.4789279))
        *   Verily (life science tech - glucose monitoring, smart contact lens)
        *   Waymo (autonomous driving - pilot in Phoenix)
        *   Wing (drone delivery - pilot in Australia)
        *   X (experimental ideas)
